And now let's move to the opening keynote,
for which we are delighted
to welcome Jutta Treviranus
Jutta is the director
of the Inclusive Design Research Center
and a professor in the Faculty of Design
at the OCAD University in Toronto.
So, Jutta, the floor is yours.
Thank you.
And if you stop sharing,
then I can share my slides.
Thank you, Carlos.
And it's a great pleasure to be able
to talk to you about this important topic.
I am going to
just start my slides
and I'm hoping that
what you see is just the
the primary slide, correct?
Correct.
Oh, wonderful. Okay.
And thank you, everyone.
I will voice my slides
and the information in the images.
And I've titled my talk first, Do no harm.
I'm usually a really optimistic person,
and I'm hoping to provide
an optimistic message.
But to realize the benefits of AI
I believe we need to first recognize
and take into account the harms.
I'm going to limit my discussion
to the harms that are specific to people
with disabilities.
There's a great deal of work detailing the
ethical concerns of currently deployed
AI from lack of representation
to human bigotry,
finding its way into algorithms
to manipulative practices,
unfair value extraction and exploitation
and disinformation.
I'll focus on accessibility
and disability,
including the recognition that disability
is at the margins of all other justice
deserving groups
and therefore most vulnerable
to the general and emerging harms,
but also the potential
opportunities of AI.
Carlos shared a number of questions
that were submitted
by those of you attending today,
and they are great questions.
Shari and I have agreed
that these will be better
covered through a conversation
than a presentation.
So at the end of my talk,
I'm going to invite Shari to talk
about those particular questions,
and we'll do the same at the book
ending talk
that Shari is giving tomorrow.
So our society is plagued
by more and more difficulties
as the world becomes more and more complex
and entangled, the choices
increase in ambiguity,
the risks associated with each decision
become more consequential.
The factors to consider in each decision
more numerous, convoluted and confusing,
and especially in times of crisis
like we've been experiencing
these last few years
and in highly competitive situations
where there is scarcity,
AI decision tools become more
and more attractive and useful.
As a illustrative example,
it is no wonder that over
90% of organized nations
use some form of AI hiring tool,
according to the U.S.
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
As work becomes less formulaic
and finding the right fit
becomes more difficult.
They are a highly seductive tool.
As an employer
when choosing who to hire
from a huge pool of applicants,
what better way to sift through
and find the gems
and eliminate the potential failed choices
than to use AI system
with an AI tool making the decisions,
we remove the risks of conflicts
of interest and nepotism.
What better way to determine who will be
a successful candidate than to use
all the evidence we've gathered
from our current successful employees,
especially when the jobs we're trying to
fill are not formulaic.
When there isn't a valid test
we can devise for candidates
to determine their suitability.
AI can use predictive analytics
to find the optimal candidates.
In this way, we're applying solid,
rigorous science and what would be
an unscientific decision otherwise,
we're not relying
on fallible human intuition
tools are
even adding information
beyond the application
to rule out falsehoods or exaggerations
in the applications.
After all, you never know.
There are so many ways to fake
a work history,
a cover letter, or to cheat in academia.
The AI hiring tools can verify through
gleaned social media data
and information available on the web
or through networked employment data.
After all, employees
have agreed to share this
as part of the conditions of employment
and other employers have agreed
as the conditions of using the tool.
If that is not enough, AI administered
and processed
assessments can be integrated
and the tools are going
beyond the practical
and qualitatively determinable capacity
of candidates
to finding the best fit
culturally to make sure that the chosen
candidates don't cause friction
but integrate comfortably.
The tools will even analyze data
from interviews to rate the socio
emotional fit of candidates.
If that's not satisfactory,
an employer can tweak the system
to add additional factors
such as their favored university
or to create an ideal persona.
Pick an ideal employee
as the model and the systems
are becoming better
and more sophisticated in finding a match.
The same system can then guide promotion
and termination,
ensuring
consistency of employment policies.
So what's wrong with this? Science.
Math. Statistical reasoning.
Efficiency. Accuracy. Consistency.
Better
and more accurate screening for the best
fit of the scientifically determined
optimal employ
accurate replication
and scaling of a winning formula.
It's a very seductive opportunity.
What could be wrong
for the employing organization?
We arrive at a comfortable monoculture
that recreates and intensifies
the successful patterns of the past.
With more data and more powerful analysis.
The intended target becomes more
and more precise.
The employer finds more and more perfect
fits.
What is wrong with that?
For the organization,
what's wrong is what happens
when the context changes,
when the unexpected happens.
A monoculture doesn't offer
much adaptation,
flexibility, or alternative choices.
That's a visual description.
I have an image showing
what happened to clone potatoes
during a blight
that was survived by a diverse crop.
Of course, we have diversity,
equity and inclusion
measures to compensate for discriminatory
hiring and increase
the number of employees
from protected underrepresented groups.
But even there,
there will be an
even greater rift
between the monoculture and the candidates
hired through diversity
and equity programs.
What happens to the candidate
with a disability who would
otherwise be a great fit
for doing the job,
when judged by these hiring systems?
When AI is analyzing,
sorting, filtering data
about a large group of people,
what does disability look like?
Where is disability in a complex
and tangled
adaptive multivariate data set?
Self-identification is often
disallowed
and many people don't self-identify.
Even if we had a way to identify
the definition
and boundaries of disability
are highly contested.
Disability statisticians are acutely aware
of some of the challenges.
In any normal distribution,
someone with a disability is an outlier.
The only common data
characteristic of disability is difference
from the average or norm.
People with disabilities
are also more diverse
from each other than people
without disabilities.
Data points in the middle are close
together, meaning they are more alike.
Data points at the periphery
are further apart, meaning
they are more different from each other.
Data regarding people
living with disabilities are spread
the furthest in what
I call the starburst of human needs.
And as a result of this pattern,
any statistically determined
prediction is highly accurate
for people that cluster in the middle,
inaccurate, as you move from the middle
and wrong,
as you get to the edge of a data plot
here,
I'm not talking about AI's ability
to recognize and translate things
that are average or typical,
like typical speech or text or from one
typical language to another or to label
typical objects in the environment
or to find the path that most people
are taking from one place to another.
But even there, in these miraculous tools
that we're using,
if we have a disability,
if your speech is not average or
the environment you're in is not typical,
AI also fails.
Disability is the Achilles heel of AI
applying statistical
reasoning and disability.
You have the culmination of
diversity variability,
the unexpected complexity and entanglement
and the exception
to every rule or determination.
AI systems are used to find
applicants that match predetermined optima
using large data
sets of successful employees and hires.
The system is optimizing
the successful patterns of the past.
All data is from the past.
The analytical power tool is honing in on
and polishing
the factors that worked before,
and we know how much hiring there is
of people with disabilities in the past.
The tool is built to be biased
against difference.
Disability is difference.
Different ways of doing the job.
Different digital traces,
different work and education history,
different social media topics,
and a tangled profile of many differences
as AI gets better
or more accurate
in its identification of the optima,
AI gets more discriminatory
and better at eliminating applicants
that don't match the optima in some way.
The assumptions
these air power tools are built
upon are that scaling and replicating
past success
will bring about future success.
Optimizing data characteristics
associated with past successes
increases future successes
and the data characteristics
that determine success
need not be specified or known
to the operators of the AI or the people
who are subject to the decisions.
And the AI cannot articulate at the moment
the highly diffuse and possibly
adaptive reasons behind the choices.
Current AI systems cannot really explain
themselves or their choices.
Despite the emergence of explainable AI,
how many of you have experienced tools
like Microsoft Viva or many other
similar tools that purport to help you
with be more efficient and productive
by analyzing your work habits?
These surveillance systems provide more
and more granular data about employment,
providing intelligence about the details
of the average optimal employee.
The results of this AI design
is that the optima will not be a person
with a disability.
There are not enough successfully
employed persons with disability,
but it is more than data gaps.
Even if we have full representation
of data from persons with disabilities,
there will not be enough
consistent data regarding success
to reach probability thresholds.
Even if all data gaps are filled,
each pattern will still be an outlier
or a minority and will lack
probabilistic power in the algorithm.
The same pattern is happening
in all life altering difficult decisions.
AI is being applied
and offered to competitive academic
admissions departments
so you won't get admitted
to beleaguered health providers
in the form of medical calculators
and emergency triage tools resulting
in more iatrogenic death and illness.
If you're different
from your classification to policing
to parole boards to immigration
and refugee adjudications
to tax
auditors, meaning more taxpayers
with disabilities are flagged to loans
and mortgage officers,
meaning people with unusual asset
patterns won't get credit
to security departments, meaning outliers
become collateral damage.
At a community level, we have evidence
based investment by governments,
AI guiding political platforms,
public health decisions, urban planning,
emergency
preparedness and security programs.
None will decide.
With the marginalized outlier,
the outliers will be marked
as security risks.
These are monumental life
changing decisions.
But even the smaller, seemingly
inconsequential decisions
can harm by a million cuts.
What gets covered by the news?
What products make it to the market?
The recommended route
be provided by the GPS.
The priority given to supply chain
processes.
What design features
make it to the market?
Statistical reasoning that is inherently
biased against difference from the average
is not only used to apply the metrics,
but to determine the optimal metrics.
And this harm predates AI, statistical
reasoning as the means of making decisions
does harm.
It does harm to anyone
not like the statistical average
or the statistically determined optima.
Assuming that that we know about the
what we know about
the majority applies to the minority,
it does harm
equating truth and valid evidence
with singular statistically determined
findings or majority truth does harm
and AI amplifies,
accelerates and automates this harm
and it is used to exonerate us
of responsibility for this harm.
We've even heard a great deal
about the concern for privacy.
Well, people with disability are most
vulnerable to data abuse and misuse.
De-identification doesn't work.
If you are highly unique,
you will be re-identified.
Differential privacy
will remove the helpful data specifics
that you need to take to make the AI work
for you and your unique needs.
Most people with disabilities
are actually forced
to barter
their privacy for essential services.
We need to go beyond privacy.
Assume there will be breaches and create
systems to prevent data abuse and misuse.
We need to ensure transparency regarding
how data is used, by whom
and for what purpose.
And it's wonderful that the EU is
organizing this talk because the EU
is doing
some wonderful measures in this regard.
But wait,
we're talking about a great number
of harms, haven't we
developed some approaches,
some solutions to this?
Don't we have auditing tools that detect
and eliminate bias and discrimination of
AI and don't
we have some systems that certify
whether an AI is ethical or not?
Can't we test tools for unwanted bias?
Unfortunately,
AI auditing tools are misleading
in that they don't detect bias
against outliers and small minorities
or anyone who doesn't fit
the bounded groupings.
Most AI ethics auditing systems
use cluster analysis,
comparing the performance
regarding a bounded justice
deserving group with the performance
for the general population.
There is no bounded cluster
for disability.
Disability
means a diffuse and highly diverse
set of differences.
Those AI ethics certification systems
and the industry
that is growing around them
raise the expectation of ethical conduct
that the problem has been fixed,
making it even more difficult
for the individual to assert and address
harm.
Many of them fall prey to Cobra effects
or the unintended consequences
of oversimplistic solutions
to complex problems or linear thinking.
Falling into the rut of mono-causality
when the causes are
very complex and entangled,
there's
some helpful progress in
regulatory guidance.
One example is the U.S.
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission,
which has developed the Americans
with disabilities Act
and the use of software, algorithms
and artificial intelligence
to assess job applicants and employees.
A very long title.
But much of the guidance focuses on fair
assessments or tests and accommodation,
not on the filtering out of applicants
before they are invited
to take an assessment or by employers
who don't use assessments.
The data related suggestion
is to remove the disability related data
that is the basis of disability
discrimination.
But what we found
is that the data cannot be isolated.
For example, an interrupted work
history will have other data effects
and markers, making it hard to match the
optimal pattern even when that is removed
For the ethical harms there are
that are common to a whole group
of marginalized individuals.
There are numerous AI
ethics efforts emerging globally.
We've tried to capture the disability
relevant ones in the We Count project.
These include standards, bodies,
which are creating
a number of standards
that act as guidance.
Government initiatives
that are looking at the impact
of their decisions
using automated decision tools.
Academic research units
that are looking at the effects
and possible approaches
and think tanks and not for profits.
One of the things that we found, though,
is that disability is often
left out of the considerations
or the ethics approaches.
And we as the questions
that were submitted, indicate
we're at an inflection point.
And this current inflection point
we’re at reminds me
of Burke and Ornstein
book, The Axemaker’s Gift,
they wanted us to be
aware of the Axemaker's gifts.
Each time
the Axemaker offered a new way
to cut and control
the world to make us rich
or safe or invincible
or more knowledgeable,
we accepted the gift and used it,
and we changed the world.
We changed our minds for each gift,
redefined the way we thought, the values
by which we lived, and the truths
for which we died.
But to regain
my optimism, even AI's potential
harm may be a double edged sword.
The most significant
gift of a AI is that it makes manifest
the harms that have been
dismissed as unscientific concerns.
It gives us an opportunity to step back
and reconsider what we want to automate
or what we want to accelerate.
It makes us consider what we mean by Best
Buy optimal truth, democracy,
planning, efficiency,
fairness, progress, and the common good.
Some of
the things we've done within my unit
to provoke this rethinking
include our inverted word cloud,
which is a tiny little mechanism
that conventional word cloud increases
the size and centrality
of the most popular
or statistically frequent words.
The less popular or outlying words
decrease in size and disappear.
We've simply inverted that behavior.
The novel
and the unique words go to the center
and grow in size.
We've been trying to provocate
with models like the Lawnmower of Justice,
where we take the top off
the Gaussian curve or the bell curve
as it might be called,
to remove the privilege
of being the same as the majority.
So the model needs to pay greater
attention to the breadth of data,
and we're exploring
bottom up community led data ecosystems
where the members govern
and share in the value of the data.
This fills the gap left by things
like impact investing.
For example,
when social entrepreneurship efforts
that are supposedly addressing
these problems can't scale
a single impactful formula
sufficiently to garner support.
It also works well to grow knowledge
of things like rare illnesses that
won't garner a market for the treatments
and therefore are not invested in
And create,
we're also creating tools to reduce harm
by signaling when a model will be wrong
or unreliable, because the evidence
based guidance is wrong
for the person being decided about.
Here we're using a tool called the Data
Set Nutrition label
that gives information about what
data is used to train the model.
But back to the axemaker’s gifts
and the opportunity to reconsider
where we're going.
From a complexity theory perspective,
where I think we're collectively stuck
on a local optima and unable
to unlearn our fundamental assumptions
and approach approaches
to find the global optimal.
And I believe there is a global optima
At the moment,
as a society,
we believe, or we act like we believe,
to succeed,
we need to do what we've been doing
more effectively, efficiently,
accurately and consistently.
We're hill climbing, optimizing the
patterns of the past, eroding the slope.
For anyone following us,
we need to stop doing
the same things more efficiently
and potentially reverse course.
I've been
considering the many local optima
we keep hill climbing,
not just statistical reasoning
that finds a single winning answer,
not just winner takes all zero sum game
capitalism and economic growth
at all costs, but also majority rules.
All or nothing decisions.
And even in our community,
this accessibility community,
the notion of a single checklist
of full accessibility
for a group of hugely diverse people,
many of whom are not represented
when coming up with the list,
the people closest to the bottom
are more diverse,
closest to the path we need to follow
to find the global optima.
Less invested in current conventions,
we need to diversify
and learn to use our complementary skills
and learn from people
who are currently marginalized.
Even in this community,
focused on accessibility.
Because if anyone knows,
we know that it is at the margins or outer
edge of our human starburst
that we find the greatest innovation
and the weakest
and the weak signals of crisis to come.
This is where you feel the extremes
of both the opportunities and the risks.
One of the emerging uncertainties
that holds
both greater
opportunities and risks is generative AI.
What are the implications
if you have a disability?
What will it do for accessibility?
I'm sure you've heard about tools
like GPT, ChatGPT,
stable infusion and various word
versions of Dall-E
Midjourney and other emerging tools.
Even today there's new announcements
regarding new tools.
These tools do not rely on purely on
statistical reasoning.
They can transfer learning
from context to context.
They use new processes
called transformers
that can pivot to new applications,
but they can also create
convincing and toxic lies.
People with disabilities
tend to be most vulnerable
to the misuse and abuse of toxic tools.
I'm going to invite Shari
to help me discuss
these emerging possibilities.
Hello.
Hello, everybody.
I'm Shari Trewin.
I'm from Google.
And a middle aged white woman
with lots of smile lines on my face.
So, Jutta, you’ve given us a lot to think about there.
I wonder if we might start off
where you ended there.
Talking a little bit
about generative A.I.
models and language models
and the
they're trained on large corpora of data
that may not reflect
the the moral values that we would like
our models to incorporate.
So one question I think
would be interesting for us to talk about
is can we teach these large language
models or generative A.I.
to apply these moral values,
even though the
the very large datasets may not
represent that?
That's a great question.
And in thinking
about how that might be done.
One of
the dilemmas
is that we may need to find a way
to quantify complex,
abstract, qualitative values.
And in that process,
will that reduce these values?
I mean, deep learning lacks judgment.
Humans sort of value human judgment
that isn't quantitative.
Perhaps one way to start is
by recognizing human diversity
and the diversity of contexts.
There is a lot of talk about
individualizing applications
without making the costs exorbitant
and to the people that need them.
The irony, of course, in that
is that the people that need
that type of individualization
the most are also most likely
to be the people
that can't afford it.
And I think it's not yet known.
Can we do that?
And of course,
there's been surprising advances
in all sorts of different areas
with respect to AI and generative AI.
But I think this is the issue of values
and shared values and the the articulation
and making mechanizable, because,
of course, we're talking about a machine
and mechanization values
that that we have difficulty
even fully
expressing is it's quite a challenge.
What do you think, Shari?
Now, I
think that
you've hit a really good point there with
can we express or can we measure
whether a model meets our values
or whether
we think it is free from bias
or as free from bias as we can make it?
Do we know?
Do we know how to evaluate?
That I think is an important question.
And some of the steps
that that often get missed
when creating a system that uses AI might
that might help with
that would be starting off
from the beginning by thinking about
who are the people
who might be at risk, what are the issues
that might be in the data?
What historical biases
might the data represent and include?
And then actively working with members
of those communities
to understand how are we going to measure
fairness here?
How are we going to measure bias?
What's our goal?
And how are we going to test?
How are we going to know
when we've achieved our goal?
So I think there's some
progress
that can be made in the design process
and thinking about the larger system
that we're embedding AI in,
everything
doesn't have to be built into one AI model
and we can augment models,
We can build systems around models
that take into account
their limitations and
create a better overall whole system.
So thinking about what
the models are currently trained on
and just the masses of data
that are used to build the models
and the training data is rife
with discrimination against difference.
So how do we how do they unlearn?
I mean, this is it's sort of
it matches some of the training
that I do within my program and that
students have been socialized
with very similar things.
And then often the issue is not learning.
The issue is unlearning, like
how do you remove those those unconscious
habituated values that that
are so embedded in our learning systems?
So it is I agree that there is is huge
opportunity,
especially with more context aware systems
and maybe what we need to pursue
is even to address things like
privacy
and the need to swim against this massive
amount of data
that is not applicable to you
is on device
personalized or not personalized,
because personalized is a term
that's also sort of been hijacked to mean
cushioning but individualized.
Let's use that term system
that takes your data
and creates a bottom up picture
of what is needed.
Yeah, I think, you know, there
there is definitely interesting avenues
to explore with transfer learning.
And can we take a model
that's been trained on data
and has learned some of the concepts
of the task that we want, but
maybe we'd like it to unlearn
some of the things that it's learned.
Can we use techniques like transfer
learning to layer on top
and and teach the
model and direct the model
more in the direction that we want?
And the
I think the the hopeful thing about that
is that it needs orders of magnitude
less data
to to train such a model.
And so that makes it
a little more achievable,
a little less daunting for
for the community to take on.
Yeah.
Do you think that current
regulation systems
are really up to the task of
regulating current and emerging A.I.
and preventing the kinds of harms
that you've been talking about?
No. A simple answer.
I don't think so.
I mean, there's so many issues.
Laws and policies are developed
at a much slower pace
They’re.
We're dealing with an uncertain
very, very quickly
moving, quickly adapting area.
And when laws are
well, they need to be testable.
And so in order to be testable,
we have to create
these static rules that can be tested,
which means we have to be
fairly specific as
opposed to sort of general and abstract.
And that tends to lead us
towards one size fits,
one criteria
which we know are are not great.
If we're trying to design for diversity
or encourage diversity.
I think we, one of the things
we need to innovate in
is the regulatory instruments
that we can use here.
What's your thinking about this?
Yeah, I think some of those
regulatory instruments
that we have do apply.
So if you're a company that's using a
a AI system in screening job
applicants,
the disability discrimination laws
still apply to you.
Somebody can still bring a lawsuit
against you
saying that your system discriminated
against them and you are still liable
to defend against that and to watch out
for those kinds of issues.
So in in some ways,
there are important pieces
that we need in place
that can be used to tackle problems
introduced when AI systems are introduced.
But then in other ways,
there was a lot more of a gray area.
When the technology is not making
discriminatory decisions, but
it still might make harmful mistakes
or that mislead people
or that people are relying on it for.
And so, you know, if anybody here has
a legal background, I would love to hear
their take as well on
how well do
current consumer protections apply.
For example, if you're using an AI.
I've become aware of and worried
about the people for whom
the law isn't adequate.
So the fact that we have a law,
the fact that we supposedly have measures
that prevent abuse or unethical practice,
if that if you are still
being treated unethically,
then it makes it even harder for you.
So I think the the measures that we do
have, the regulations that we do
have have to have some way of continuously
being iterated upon so that we can catch
the individuals that are not included.
And we have to recognize that
our supposed solutions
are actually not solutions,
that this is never fixed, that it's
it requires this ongoing vigilance.
And so the yeah, there's
that there's much more to say about that.
But yes, you're right.
It would be great to hear from any
anyone with a legal background.
Yeah.
Let's maybe talk a little bit about it's
a bit more about generative AI
that you mentioned at the end there.
Know it. It
produces very plausible convincing
statements when when asked the question,
but it also very plausibly
and convincingly,
completely makes things up
and isn't always reliable.
And in fact right now is not connected
to any form of ground truth or
able to assess the accuracy of what makes
the one
question I think that's interesting is
will this technology reach a stage where
it can support
the kinds of decisions that we're using,
statistical reasoning for right now?
Eventually, obviously, right now it's it's
not there yet.
Yeah.
And it's interesting because just recently
there have been the announcements
of these systems
being used for medical guidance
using large
language models to come up with answers
to your medical questions,
which of course is
quite.
Yeah, it'll be interesting
to see what happens.
It's scary, I think is exactly scary.
And what about the the the medical advice
given to someone where
within the data set that is provided,
there isn't a lot of advice.
So that given that the system does
I mean ask any of the LLMs
or the chat bots
how confident they are in their
their answers.
They'll answer that
they are confident
because there isn't a sense of
what is the the risk level,
what is the the confidence level
of this particular response.
There
there's no self-awareness of what is wrong
and what is right and what is the context
that is in front of me.
Yeah, I think that's actually
a great opportunity.
There to explore whether we can enable
models a little better to know
what they don't know,
to know when the case with right now
isn't well-represented in their models
or maybe an outlier case.
That they
should perhaps pass on
to some other form of decision
making or at least convey
the less confidence
in the voice of their, you know,
I think generative AI today
gives us a glimpse of the future
and the kinds of interactions
that are possible, the kinds of ways
we might interact with technology
in the future.
You know, clearly there's
a research priority to ground it better.
In truth, and
it needs to
be much more reliable,
much more trustworthy, much more accurate.
But then you go to the
it can support serious applications.
And the idea of
using it to get medical advice just is
that that's a very, very scary
because it is so eloquent
that it's immediately trustworthy
and it gets enough things
right
that we begin to trust it very quickly.
And so in some ways, the the
the advances that have been made are
it's it's so good
that it really highlights the dangers,
I think, more effectively.
So, yeah, I think that's interesting
to think about
what would a human A.I.
interaction look like in the future?
Would would we need to change train
or was one to divide by bias
and kind of work with a larger language
model to adapt responses?
Would we you know how
automatic
image description has sort of evolved?
At first it would
you know, we would throw out words
and that might be in the picture.
And sometimes it was right
and sometimes it would be wrong.
And now you see these generated
alternative text
being phrased in a way
that conveys the uncertainty.
So could be a tree or something like that.
And I think the large language models
could do something
similar to
reduce the chances of misleading people.
So they might say things
like many people seem to think
blah, blah, blah,
or get better at citing sources.
I think there's a lot of ways
that we can use
these in direct research to,
you know, to overcome some of the really
obvious failings that are there right now.
But the limitations
that we currently have,
Mark Urban has shared
in in the chat that I can see
from the US government regulatory side,
much of the current laws
or regulations for access to government
services are about the technical
accessibility of the interfaces
rather than the more
AI focused questions
around system exclusion or mismatch.
So that's
coming back to our point
about the regulatory systems.
And I just noticed that
Mike Calvo says what a Debbie Downer
my talk is, which
I think by design,
we decided between Shari and I that
I would provide the warnings
and then Shari would provide optimism.
I say I get the best of their.
I think there are
quite a few questions
in the question and answer panel. Yes.
And so maybe what we should do is...
Over there's so many things
to explore with the emerging models
and so many uncertainties,
but there's some great questions
there as well.
Yeah, How about
jumping around on me...
So many new questions.
So I know
this is not in the right order, but
as people are adding questions,
they're kind of
they're kind of jumping.
Okay, so Bruce Bailey is asking.
He says, Fantastic keynote.
Please expound on personalization
having been hijacked
to mean cushioning
time and perspective as new.
Sure.
Yeah, I can definitely talk about that.
I mean, one of the ways in which
we recognize that we're all diverse,
and especially
if you have a disability, you're diverse
from other people with disabilities
and that our needs are there for
a diverse has been to look at
how do we personalize.
But personalization has been used
as a term to look at
using recommender engines, using
various ways in which we’re offered
only information
and recommendations from people like us,
which of course removes any dissonance
and any diverse
thinking and our exposure
to alternative views and perspectives.
And to some extent it causes us to
it causes greater polarization
because we're also
offered a personalized view
of the current stance that we're taking
so that it gets confirmed again
and again and again.
So I'm not talking about that type
of personalization.
I'm talking about the type
of personalization where the interface
makes it easier
for us to participate and addresses
our specific, very diverse requirements
with respect
to that participation so that
I've moved
away from the term personalization simply
because I don't want it to be mistaken
for the type of personalization
that cushions us away from diverse
perspectives.
Because certainly we need to be exposed
to those that diversity of perspectives,
and we need to consider
the diverse stories that people have.
You know, I think personalization,
personalization is
really part of accessibility in general,
but there's
you know, you're talking about
a particular kind of personalization,
but AI personalization.
I'm going to talk a little bit more
in the keynote at the end about an example
of AI personalization
of personalized models
that are
providing personalized access
to digital content, which I think
is a good use of personalization.
Yeah, Yeah.
So Carve or Convey
from EDF says thank you
Jutta for this important keynote.
I've seen different toolkits
to test and mitigate bias in AI.
What is your view on them
and their usefulness?
Right. So we've been doing a
well actually
as part of a number of our projects,
including ODD, which is optimizing
diversity with disability
and our We Count project,
we've been looking at a variety of A.I.
ethics, auditing tools, but
also we've done sort of the secret shopper
test of employment tools
and then seen whether we can detect the
the particular biases
that unwanted biases
as is is made clear by AI.
So I mean bias of course,
the tools are intended to be biased.
And so it's
the unwanted bias as a proviso.
And what we find is that
they're great at cluster analysis
and then they they supplement the cluster
analysis with a number of questions
that is
asked of the implementer of the system.
So the primary technical key to to
the tools is determining
whether there is unfair
treatment of one
bounded group with another.
And that works
well if you have something like
determining whether there's discrimination
regarding gender or discrimination
regarding declared race or language
or those sorts of things
which do cluster well, but it doesn't
none of the tools really detect
whether there is discrimination
based upon disability.
And and the
because the the particular
discriminating characteristics
are so diffuse and different
from person to person,
we can't see how it would be possible
in a litigation perspective
or in a regulatory perspective to prove
that you have been discriminated
against it.
It's going to be very,
very difficult to come up with that proof
because the
the particular characteristics are
themselves so entangled and diffuse.
And so it may not be one
particular characteristic associated
with your disability
that you would use to say,
well, look at here, I'm
being discriminated against
because of this characteristic
that relates to my disability.
Yeah.
So I think there are a lot
of the toolkits.
Many of the methods in the toolkit
are group fairness
metrics like, like you say, where.
And that's an important thing to measure.
It is when we when we do have the ability
to identify groups and to know for sure
who's in which group and which one,
the boundaries of these groups are always
not fuzzy.
You know, there's the there's
a deeply embedded assumption that there's
only two genders, for example,
in a lot of the data.
And many of these tools.
So they have their problems
and this ability exemplifies this.
The same problem. Yeah, same problems.
But there are also individual
fairness metrics and measures,
and some of the toolkits
include some of these kinds of measures.
And so instead of asking,
is this group as a whole,
treated equivalently to this other group,
they ask
is a similar
are similar individuals treated similarly?
And so you could imagine with an approach
like that,
if I as an individual with my unique data,
I could make a
case that I was discriminated against by
creating another person
who was similar to me in the respects
that are important for this job.
Mm hmm. Yeah.
And. And see what kind of result
they got compared to my result.
And that would be,
you know, a way to measure
individual fairness
and and build up a case.
Yes. Yeah.
Unfortunately, there's not that
many schools that that currently do that.
And the certification systems
that currently exist
are not implementing those
so that there is much to work on there.
Yeah.
Think it's sort of more of a case, a
case by case basis,
but this particular job to me
so it's not so easy
to make a blanket statement about it,
but I think it's not impossible to
assess.
Okay, so
do we have time for one more?
How long?
How much longer do we have
another three minute?
Well, you have almost 10 minutes more,
so you can definitely take one more.
Awesome, great. Um,
let's see.
So Fabian Berger
says, I feel that AI
but before it was KPIs or else are
are searched by managers
to justify their decisions or run away
from the responsibility
of their decisions.
It follows a need for them
but with a wrong incomplete answer.
Do you agree? Yes.
I mean, I think that the issue
and I was trying to make that point,
but possibly not well enough
that AI is doing much of what
we've done before, but
it's amplifying, accelerating
and automating those things.
And certainly AI can be used to
for confirmation bias to find the specific
justification for what it is
that we need to justify whether it's
something good or something bad.
So the a lot of the the harms of AI
already existed
because of course AI is learning
our past practices and our data,
but because it
I guess I've often used the analogy
of a power tool
before it was this
practice
that was not that we did manually.
And so there was an opportunity
to make exceptions,
to reconsider, you know,
is this actually what we're we're doing?
And to, to do something different?
But with the with a power tool, it's
it becomes this much more impactful thing.
And there's less opportunity to
to craft the approach that we take.
Yeah, I think that's
why it's really important to
to try to design for outliers
and consider outliers in in and again
I come back to this point of a system
that the system
as a whole that includes AI if we can't
guarantee that the AI
itself is going to give us the
characteristics that we want,
then we need to design around that
and and be mindful of that
while we're designing.
There's also, of course, the opportunity
to try to clean up our data in general
is there are in situations
where we can identify
problems with the data,
we should certainly tackle
that or imbalances in the data.
We should certainly tackle that.
That's one you know, one other step that
I think there's many steps to fairness and
and to ethical application of AI.
And no one step
is a magic solution to all of that.
But if we
stay aware of the risks,
make sure we're talking
to the right people and involving them,
then I think we can we can at least
mitigate problems and know
the limits of the technologies
that we're using
better.
Yeah, I've been looking at some of
the other questions that have come in
and one of the discussions was about
the Gaussian curve and or the Gaussian center.
And one thing I think that
one point that I may not have made
as clearly
is that in fact the the myth
that we need to have a single answer
at the very middle of the Gaussian curve,
which of course matches our notion
of majority rules
or as the way to decide amongst
difficult decisions, it
an alternative to that is to address
the very, very diverse edges
initially and to prioritize those.
Because what what then happens is
it gives us room
for to change.
It helps us address the uncertainty.
It makes the whole design or
decision or options that are available
much more
generous and therefore prepares us better
for the vulnerabilities that we're going
to experience in the future.
So that,
of course I'm an academic, and to say that
that statistical reasoning and evidence
through scientific methods is at
fault is is a fairly dangerous thing
to say, especially during a time
when truth is so much under attack and
but I think what we need to do is
not reduce truth to statistical reasoning,
but to acknowledge that there are
a variety of perspectives, untruth,
and that we need to come up with one
that that addresses
the people that we're currently excluding
in our notions of truth.
Yeah, So there's 2 minutes left.
I, I think now
maybe we could squeeze in one more
question here.
Jen Benjamin
asks, Do we think
that AI and big companies driving
research on it can be problematic towards
societal issues which don't necessarily
give the highest revenue?
And if so, how can it be faced?
Yeah, that's a huge question.
I think even government
efforts are facing in their decision
making on profit
and economic progress and
and impact measures that are
so that I think
one of the things we need to abandon
is this idea
that a solution needs to be formulaic
and that we need to scale it
by a formulaic replication.
And we need to recognize that
that there's a different form of scaling
that is by diversification,
and that we need
to contextually apply things.
And I mean, that's one of the lessons
of Indigenous and indigenous cultures
that the
what, what has been labeled as colonialist
is, is actually what many governments
are still implementing, even in things
like social entrepreneurship.
But yes, big companies,
of course, are driven by profit and
is that the best approach
to achieve the common good?
That's a huge question.
I think.
And I think this would be a great one
to come back to tomorrow, actually.
Yeah, exactly.
I mean, the symposium
let's let's come back to that one
because I see that
we're out of time right now.
But thank you very much.
Thank you.